# Tesseract

A ==tesseract=={Q12142} is a four-dimensional cube and has a mathematical reality, and yet a human eye and human mind is incapable of understanding its dimensions because they exist beyond its faculties. The eye sees simple actions like motion and rotation as a confusing amorphous mass. And yet within that mass is a series of planes that can be understood objectively, manipulated and rearranged. A deep map is to a map what a tesseract is to a cube, just as a map is to a set of written directions what a cube is to a square: just because it is confusing does not mean that its depth is not meaningful. Indeed, Tesseracts are an ur symbol of alien minds beyond the comprehension of humans, as are dyson spheres that envelop and syphon the energy of a star. A type II Kardashev civilisation has technology beyond that dreamt of by humanity, able to capture the energy of a star. Beyond that lie hypothetical type III civilisations, able to capture all the energy emitted by its galaxy. A type II civilisation is a myth beyond comprehension to humanity, and a type III civilisation would likely seem as such to those who have reached type II. A four dimensional being would see a three dimensional world as laughably crude, just as we see the flatness of two dimensions as truncated. Timothy Morton and Dominic Boyer point out that hyperobjectivity is relational: to an electron, a biro is a hyperobject.[^1]

.ve-media wc:8-cell-simple.gif width=50% 

We are the electrons, and the deep is our biro. Hyperobjects like the ocean share a kinship with four-dimensional objects such as a tesseract in that their reality is incomprehensible even when we can know a great deal about them. Their vastness is as beyond our comprehension as a fourth dimension and as beyond our technological grasp as a dyson sphere, despite the complexities of both being eminently within the grasp of scientific description. They exist at an extend and at an ontological depth that is simply impossible to grasp, yet we know they are there. A great many of the plagues of the Anthropocene arise from this fundamental incompatibility. Although knowledge—and a great deal of knowledge—is possible, some things lie beyond. The deep map is an expression of the chaos beyond comprehension, the complexity of the indeterminate, of stories that are told at scales beyond the teller’s ability to express.[^2] Like a reality beyond technology or our physics, we can speculate and imagine and yet never fully experience. The inky absence beyond the surface may be closer than that beyond the light of our sun, and yet each is equally intimidating.

.ve-media https://iiif.europeana.eu/presentation/437/item_LWWVBQPZ6DOAXVKGQVVDMBQH4ZLUG33A/manifest

Depth is a hard concept to quantify with human senses even if it has an objective extent. It is a knowable measurement—every three-dimensional entity has a depth—but also an abstract quality. Depth is often an abstraction to the human observer, its reality unknown. The suggestion of depth creates a sense of awe and fear. Space is deep, the ocean is deep, the hidden reality of what lurks in darkness, the fuel of psychological horror—is underpinned by the inability to determine depth. The object that we cannot comprehend the true magnitude of—the university itself—is an expression of absolute depth. Its extent is so far beyond our knowledge that it cannot be grasped. Like the extra dimension in a tesseract, a deep map adds another layer of qualities to depth that boggles the mind, but also provides endless opportunity. The depth of a deep mapping is another dimension within the map.

It is understandable that an incomprehensibly deep map might provoke fear and paralysis. Where does one begin? Where does one end? Coming to terms with the fact that quantity has a quality but also an elusiveness of its own takes time. This is perhaps why deep mapping is often a method rather than a philosophy. It is exhaustive, extensive work when completed in toto, but also a valuable addition to other methods. It whispers in the background of the spatial humanities, hinting at a greater chaos at the heart of the human impulse to map. It suggests that there is a hidden reach below those swimming in familiar methodological waters, deep, terrible and full of wonders. Just was one does not need to apprehend a tesseract with human faculties to understand its value, so too can a deep map withdraw from comprehensibility and yet remain redolent of potential meaning.

[^1]: Anthropocenes – Human, Inhuman. ‘Hyperobjects, Hyposubjects and Solidarity in the Anthropocene: Anthropocenes Interview with Timothy Morton and Dominic Boyer’. *Anthropocenes – Human, Inhuman, Posthuman* 1, no. 1 (27 May 2020): 10, p. 2.
[^2]: Timothy Morton, Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World, Posthumanities, 27 (University of Minnesota Press, 2013)
